Problems with Array data structure so that we understand the problems and we feel the need of linked list data structure

Array is a sequential data structure. It stores elements at contigous location.


linked list drops the requirement that linked list have to be at contigous location.
Linked list is also sequential linear data structure and these two data structure are the biggest competetor of each other  

At many places you can either use  array or a linked list. For example implementation of other data structure like stack queue, deque, 

int arr[100];This is an array of fixed size 
int arr[n];This is a variable sized array where user can specify i want an array of size n where n can be any number any user input 
If these are local arrays then these are allocated on the stack frame of function. These array go out of the scope when your function got over 

int *arr = new int[n]; Dynamically allocated array . This array is Dynamically allocated on heap. This allocated array stays there. It does not go out of the scope 

The last array in C++ is vector which is a Dynamically sized array. They grow when you add more and more element 

Problems with arrays 
1: Either the size is fixed and preallocated(in both fixed and variable sized arrays), or the worst case insertion at the end is O(n)
This problem is solved by dynamic size array which adjust their size when they become full like vector in C++, array list in java, list in python 
sometimes insertion even it is done at the end it can become o(n) while your array has space it is O(1) when it becomes full it become O(n) even with dynamic sized array 

2: Insertion in the middle (or beginning) is costly
3: Deletion from the middle(or beginning) is costly
4: implementation of data structures like queue and deque are complex with arrays 
5: suppose you are making a system level program U have limited memort environment and u want to make sure that u have enough space to allocate to large data whenever you need  There is a problem in system level program when you have memory environment 


Given a sequencve of items. Whenever we see an item x in the sequence , we need to replace it with 5 instances of another item you

I/P: d  e a x q r x p y
O/P: d e a y y y y y q r y y y y y p y

It will be difficult for arrays to do this and we can do this with vector but in both of them we have to allocate extra space but in linkedlist it will become super easy 

When we are sorting an array using merged sort we need an extra space but if we are sorting a linkedlist using merged sort then we dont need an auxillary space 